[SWISH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> You look at death and you
see it's the heaviest melodrama
going.
It's the one that
sucks everybody in.
You might be very, very
spacious about everything.
Ah, working.
Ah, children are playing.
But you come to death, and
it's suddenly, I'm dying.
At first, when you were
trying to get high,
you were trying to push away the
things that brought you down.
Then when you want
to get free, you
see that the only things that
bring you down are yourself.
Nothing's bringing you down
but your own attachments.
So that the things that get
you in life are the secret.
They're the clue to your
stash of attachments of mind.
And you begin to see
how each thing that
gets you is showing you where
you're holding, where you're
still clinging to a model
of this versus that, of I
want this, but I
don't want that.
I like this, but
I don't like that.
And the quietness of mind is
standing behind preferences.
You stand behind the
this versus the that,
the yin versus the yang.
All of the polarities, you
stand in the one behind the two.
So now once you want
to be free, at first
you want to hang out with
people to keep you high.
Later, you want to confront
the fires that catch you.
You want to purify
through those fires.
You just find yourself drawn
towards the things that
are still catching you so
that you can get to the point
where you can be in them,
but not lost in them,
where you can keep your space
even when you're in them.
And dying is one of the big
ones that sucks everybody in.
And so part of the work
is developing the ability
to be with somebody that's
dying or be dying yourself
and stay very clear
and very present.
Because those that
are from religions
that focus on the
moment of death, which
is most of the religions that
have reincarnation in them,
see life as a preparation
for the moment of death.
They see that.
And they see, as Don
Juan says, that you keep
death over your left shoulder.
You live each moment as
if it's your last moment.
Not in a kind of macabre,
horrible, negative way,
but in a way in
which each moment is
the one where if it's
to be your death moment,
it's, ah, here I am.
Right.
Very clear.
Now I'm dying.
Now the body is dropping.
Like the Tibetans
in describing--
in the Tibetan Book of the Dead,
they describe the dying moments
and they talk about the
Earth element leaves,
and you feel heaviness.
The water element
leaves, you feel dryness.
The fire element leaves,
you feel coldness.
The air element leaves.
Your out breath is not
followed by an in breath.
What follows after
the incarnation is
what's created by the
attachments of the moment
of death, so that
those beings that
are going to go
into the white light
are about three
quarters of the way
turned around before
the moment of death.
They're already right
here with all of it,
even before they die.
So that a lot of the work
you're doing in a lifetime
is the preparation for
the moment of death,
and keeping death present
enriches the moment of life.
That the optimum
way to be healed
is the optimum way to die, which
is your full consciousness.
But your full
consciousness listens, does
what it can to preserve
the precious human body,
but also allows what is to be.
And a lot of people
lose it because they
are so attached to which way
it all goes all the time.
I work with people that are
having, like, a slow illness,
terminal illness, and they're
losing their motor ability.
And each stage
they lose, I watch
some people who are able
to open to the new stage
and say, ah, so.
And those people don't suffer.
And then I watch somebody
who looks at the shoes
in the closet they'll
never wear again
and sits around feeling
sorry because they
can't wear those shoes anymore.
They're holding onto the model
of who they were a moment ago.
The minute you let
go into what is--
ah.
The minute you hold on to
a model of what might be
or what ought to be or
what should be or what was,
suffering.
It's that disparity that
creates the suffering.
So that any time
there is suffering,
it's a clue to where
your mind is holding.
Finally, suffering
is the tastiest clues
about your stash,
and so with death.
People that open to each stage
of consciousness and move
with it don't suffer at all.
Not at all.
[MUSIC PLAYING]